Document how to extend the GraphQL schema (#24)
front-commerce/developers.front-commerce.com: source/docs/essentials/extend-the-graphql-schema.md

to discuss using an external library sharing the same principles instead of maintaining our
own implementation. **The migration path would be seamless if we chose to migrate to this library.**
Please do not hesitate to share your thoughts with us there.
</blockquote>

In order to extend the schema, you will have to:
1. register the GraphQL module in the Front-Commerce application
2. implement the GraphQL module itself using the API provided

## Register a GraphQL module

Front-Commerce allows you to manage your modules in the `serverModules` key of the [`.frontcommerce.js`](#TODO) file located in your project’s root.

Let’s add a `HelloWorld` module!

To add a new GraphQL module, add it to the existing list:

```diff
module.exports = {
  name: "Front-Commerce",
  url: "https://www.front-commerce.test",
  modules: ["./src"],
  serverModules: [
    { name: "FrontCommerceCore", path: "server/modules/front-commerce-core" },
-    { name: "Magento2", path: "server/modules/magento2" }
+    { name: "Magento2", path: "server/modules/magento2" },
+    { name: "HelloWorld", path: "./src/server/modules/hello-world" }
  ]
};
```

> The `name` key must be unique across your server modules. It is a temporary name that is used during a code generation step and has no other usage in the application.

Author: It is only used in the generated `.front-commerce/modules.js` to name the import.

```js
import FrontCommerceCore from "server/modules/front-commerce-core";
import Magento2 from "server/modules/magento2";

module.exports = [FrontCommerceCore, Magento2];
```

I will create an issue to remove it by 1.0 and prevent the need for a name in the declaration (and prevent confusion).

</blockquote>

### `typeDefs` (optional)

GraphQL type definitions provided by this module. As a developer, this is a contract with the rest of your codebase.

Type definitions must [GraphQL schema language strings](https://graphql.org/learn/schema/), and can be declared inline or loaded from a `gql` file. One can create new types, add top level queries (by extending the `Query` type), mutations or extend types from other modules.

```js
// or import typeDefs from './schema.gql';
const typeDefs = `
extend type Query {
  "Be polite!"
  sayHello (name: String!): Message
}

type Message {
  response: String
  audio: String
}
`

module.exports = {
  namespace: "Acme/HelloWorld",
  typeDefs: typeDefs
};
```

<blockquote class="info">
**In depth:** under the hood, all module’s `typeDefs` are merged in a single array passed to graphql-tools' [`makeExecutableSchema`](https://www.apollographql.com/docs/graphql-tools/generate-schema.html#makeExecutableSchema) function
</blockquote>

### `resolvers` (optional)

> This is an object containing all the resolvers for resolving fields defined in the schema (usually from your `typeDefs`). This is where the implementation resides.

Reviewer: Is it worth mentioning the types that are used as keys here (using Query as an example)? Even if it's documented in Apollo Tools I'd say it would make it easier for the readers not to switch context.

      return {
        message: message,
        audio: `https://tts.service.com/q=${message}`
      };
    }
  }
};

module.exports = {
  namespace: "Acme/HelloWorld",
  // …
  resolvers: resolvers
};
```

<blockquote class="info">
**In depth:** under the hood, all module’s `resolvers` are merged in a single object (using [lodash.merge](https://lodash.com/docs/#merge) passed to graphql-tools' [`makeExecutableSchema`](https://www.apollographql.com/docs/graphql-tools/generate-schema.html#makeExecutableSchema) function. It is possible to override resolvers declared in another module by declaring it as a dependency and registering a local resolver.
</blockquote>

### `contextEnhancer` (optional)

The `contextEnhancer` module definition key should be a function that initializes code that will be made available in GraphQL’s context, under the `loaders` key. **It is specific to Front-Commerce.**

This is where you could construct models or [dataloaders](#TODO) that should be used in your GraphQL resolvers.

The `contextEnhancer` function must return an object whose keys will be merged with previous modules’. It will be passed a single argument with the following keys:

> * `req`: the current server request

Reviewer: Should we add a link to express docs here?

> * `loaders`: current loaders (from module initialized beforehand)

Reviewer: It might be worth mentioning that it is important to register the correct dependency if one is using a loader from a previous module.

* `makeDataLoader`: a factory to build a dataloader (see [dataloaders](#TODO))

> * `config`: the global configuration

Reviewer: It's a bit weird to talk about `globalConfiguration` because I would expect to have access to files in `src/config` for instance. Maybe we could at least talk about `the server configuration`?

Here is an example:

```

> const MessageLoader = require("./loader");

Reviewer: It might be good to add an actual implementation for MessageLoader? Especially since there's the weird (but awesome) constructor with currying.

module.exports = {
  namespace: "Acme/HelloWorld",
  resolvers: {
    Query: {
      sayHello: (_, { name }, { loaders }) => {
        return loaders.Message.load(`Hello ${name}`);
      }
    }
  }
  contextEnhancer: ({ req, loaders, makeDataLoader, config }) => {
    return {

>       Message: MessageLoader(makeDataLoader)(config.apiBaseUrl)

Reviewer: I think that this configuration does not exist in the core.

    }
  }
}
```

## Grouping small modules in a « meta-module »

We recommend to keep your GraphQL modules small and focused on a single feature.
If several teams are working on the project, small modules are a way to [federate the graph implementation](https://principledgraphql.com/integrity#2-federated-implementation).
It also makes it easier to change implementations and service providers later in the project.
For instance you could replace a `Magento2/Cms` module with a `Wordpress/Cms` one without impacting

> the web application (as soon as both schema shares a common API).

Reviewer: Not sure about this one but:

```suggestion
the web application (as long as both schema shares a common API).
```

But having a lot of different modules could make distribution more tedious.
That is why Front-Commerce supports the concept of « meta-modules », which are a way to group
smaller modules together.

For instance, [Front-Commerce’s Magento2 integration](#TODO) can be registered in your project
using only one line if you want all the features:

```diff
// .front-commerce.js
module.exports = {
  name: "Front-Commerce",
  url: "https://www.front-commerce.test",
  modules: [],
  serverModules: [
-    { name: "FrontCommerceCore", path: "server/modules/front-commerce-core" }
+    { name: "FrontCommerceCore", path: "server/modules/front-commerce-core" },
+    { name: "Magento2", path: "server/modules/magento2" }
  ]
};
```

Under the hood, it imports several modules at once (`Magento2/Cms`, `Magento2/Catalog`, `Magento2/Checkout`, `Magento2/Search`…).

> For a module to be considered as a meta-module, you only need to expose a list of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For a module to be considered as a meta-module, you need to expose a list of
```

> sub-modules in the `modules` key of the module definition (along with the namespace).

Reviewer: We almost had an API like documentation previously but everything wasn't documented (no paragraph about the `modules` keys). I'm wondering if it can be confusing.

Let’s add a `ClicksCounters` GraphQL module by adding it to the existing list:

```diff
// .front-commerce.js
module.exports = {
  name: "Front-Commerce",
  url: "https://www.front-commerce.test",
  modules: [],
  serverModules: [
    { name: "FrontCommerceCore", path: "server/modules/front-commerce-core" },
-    { name: "Magento2", path: "server/modules/magento2" }
+    { name: "Magento2", path: "server/modules/magento2" },
+    { name: "ClicksCounters", path: "./my-module/server/modules/clicks-counters" }
  ]
};
```

The `name` key must be unique across your server modules. It is a temporary name
that is used during a code generation step and has no other usage in the
application.

The `path` must be a path to your module definition file (created above).

<blockquote class="info">
  **In depth:** under the hood, Front-Commerce is generating a
  `.front-commerce/modules.js` file from this configuration which is loaded very
  early in the server bootstrapping process. The name is used to import the
  correct module and export it in an homogeneous list, used by the
  `withGraphQLApi` express middleware.
</blockquote>

> **Congratulations!** You now have a new custom module ready to enhance the data

Reviewer: Shouldn't we say that it needs a server restart here?

the schema matching our use case.

We would like to:

1. add a `clicksCounter` field to the existing `Product` type
2. add an `incrementProductCounter` mutation

It could look like so:

```graphql
# my-module/server/modules/clicks-counters/schema.gql
extend type Product {
  clicksCounter: Int
}

extend type Mutation {
  incrementProductCounter(sku: String!, incrementValue: Int): MutationSuccess
}
```

<blockquote class="info">
  The `Product` type is part of Front-Commerce’s `Magento2` module. The
  `MutationSuccess` type used as the mutation response type is part of
  Front-Commerce’s core.
</blockquote>

Then expose the schema using the `typeDefs` key of the module definition. Update
the `my-module/server/modules/clicks-counters/index.js` entrypoint:

```diff
// my-module/server/modules/clicks-counters/index.js
+import typeDefs from "./schema.gql";
+
export default {
-  namespace: "ClicksCounters"
+  namespace: "ClicksCounters",
+  typeDefs: typeDefs
};
```

<blockquote class="info">
  Webpack is in fact taking care of converting SDL into a Javascript object
  using an appropriate loader.
</blockquote>

> **Congratulations again!** You should now be able to see these new fields and

Reviewer: Maybe I'd add a mention that no restart is needed here because the server is hot reloaded and it's **awesome**.

> sue them in GraphQL.

Author: Yes, it should be `use` ;)

```suggestion
use them in GraphQL.
```

Try to execute the query below in your GraphQL playground (by default at
[http://localhost:4000/playground](http://localhost:4000/playground)):

```graphql
# http://localhost:4000/playground
{
  product(sku: "WH09") {
    sku
    clicksCounter
  }
}
```

Our GraphQL module does not yet have any code for sending content, so you must
see the following response:

```json
{
  "data": {
    "product": {
      "sku": "WH09",
      "clicksCounter": null
    }
  }
}
```

Let’s now add some executable logic to our module.

### Implement resolvers

The GraphQL middleware relies on resolver functions to determine the data to
return for a given field. This is where most of the « real work » is done, for
instance by fetching remote datasources or transforming data.

Resolvers are exposed using the `resolvers` key of the module definition. It

> should be a **Resolver map**: an object where each key is a GraphQL type name,

Reviewer: I'd put a link on to `https://www.apollographql.com/docs/graphql-tools/resolvers` here too.

for asynchronous operations.

<blockquote class="more">
  To know more about resolvers and their internals, we recommend the reading of
  [GraphQL Tools resolvers
  documentation](https://www.apollographql.com/docs/graphql-tools/resolvers).
</blockquote>

First, update the module definition as follow:

```diff
// my-module/server/modules/clicks-counters/index.js
import typeDefs from "./schema.gql";
+import resolvers from "./resolvers";

export default {
  namespace: "ClicksCounters",
-  typeDefs: typeDefs
+  typeDefs: typeDefs,
+  resolvers: resolvers
};
```

And then create the `my-module/server/modules/clicks-counters/resolvers.js` file
with a resolver map as below (we are going to analyze it in details in a few
seconds):

```js
// my-module/server/modules/clicks-counters/resolvers.js
const counters = new Map();

const currentValueOf = sku => counters.get(sku) || 0;

module.exports = {
  Product: {
    clicksCounter: ({ sku }) => currentValueOf(sku)
  },

  Mutation: {
    incrementProductCounter(_, { sku, incrementValue = 1 }) {
      counters.set(sku, currentValueOf(sku) + incrementValue);
      return {
        success: true
      };
    }
  }
};
```

> Let’s analyze this code part by part to understand what is possible to achieve

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let’s analyze this code to understand what is possible to achieve
```

And I'd make the parts explicit by adding titles. This makes it easier to see the transitions between each parts.

> in a module.

Reviewer: I'm not sure about the module part. We only explain the resolvers here, not what a module is capable of. I'd simply remove it.

First of all, the exported resolver map defines a resolver for the
`clicksCounter` field of any `Product` field.

```js
// …
module.exports = {
  Product: {
    clicksCounter: ({ sku }) => currentValueOf(sku)
  }
  // …
};

> ```

Reviewer: I liked the fact that you've put a reminder of the mutation SDL below. It might be a good idea to put the SDL about the clicksCounter field here too.

The resolver function will use the `sku` key from its parent data and will
return the the current counter value from its local state (defaulting to `0` if
no clicks occured).

It is important to understand that the `sku` is not a parameter provided by
frontend developers in the Query. It comes from data returned by earlier
resolvers that fetched a `Product`, no matter where in the graph (category,
upsells, cart…).

> <blockquote class="info">

Reviewer: Sometimes we use note, sometimes we use info :man_shrugging:

Author: We’ll have to homogenize it when/if styling it. For now, I agree: :woman_shrugging:

> Please note that it could have been implemented as a top level Query as well:

Reviewer: In this note, it's a bit weird if you don't really have a GraphQL background. I'd add something saying that in this case, the sku is a parameter and will be available in the second parameter of your resolver.

Or, i'd leave this as is and move this note in the schema definition since it's not related to the resolvers right now.

Author: I’ll move it in the GraphQL part. It is more relevant there indeed.

```graphql
extend type Query {
  clicksCounterByProductSKU(sku: String!): Int
}
```
However we feel it would have been less intuitive for frontend developers. It
may seem more natural for people used to design relational databases or REST
APIs, but we recommend to try limiting as much as possible the number of
top-level queries in your projects to learn _thinking in GraphQL_.

</blockquote>

The second part of this resolver map is a `incrementProductCounter` mutation.
Mutations in GraphQL are a way to modify server-side data (whereas queries allow
to read data). GraphQL modules must declare mutations by extending the top-level
GraphQL `Mutation` type. You can read more about Mutations in the

> [GraphQL’s Mutations documentation](https://graphql.org/learn/queries/#mutations).

Reviewer: Would it be good to mention GET vs POST here? It was made the most sense during our trainings.

```js
// …
module.exports = {
  // …
  Mutation: {
    incrementProductCounter(_, { sku, incrementValue = 1 }) {
      counters.set(sku, currentValueOf(sku) + incrementValue);
      return {
        success: true
      };
    }
  }
};
```

In this resolver, the first parameter is unused (because in a top level resolver

> no earlier resolvers have been run so there are no _parent data_). The second

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this resolver, the first parameter is unused because in a top level resolver there is no _parent data_.
```

> parameter contains arguments passed to the mutation. These parameters are the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
parameter contains arguments passed to the mutation. These arguments are the
```

If you use the `parameters` term here, there might be a confusion with the parameters of a the resolver.

Author: Well spotted… I tried to be careful and caught several mistakes but not this one.

`(sku: String!, incrementValue: Int)` part of the schema definition declared
earlier:

```graphql
extend type Mutation {
  incrementProductCounter(sku: String!, incrementValue: Int): MutationSuccess
}
```

> The resolver uses the mandatory `sku` argument to fetch the current counter

Reviewer: This paragraph feels a bit confusing to me. I don't really know how to express it in a better way.

Author: I’ll try with bullet points.

value from its local state and defines a new value incremented of the
`incrementValue` optional argument. If the `incrementValue` has not been
provided in the GraphQL request, it defaults to `1`.

> Finally, the resolver returns a value matching the `MutationSuccess`

Reviewer: I'd add a TODO html comment to add a reference about it.

Front-Commerce type which in this example is always successful.

<blockquote class="info">
  ProTip™: you can debug the data passed in a resolver using `console.log` to
  view its shape in your server console shell output. To do so, a convenient
  thing to know is that `console.log` returns a falsy value. Hence, in the
  resolver above you could debug the `sku` value by updating the resolver as
  below:

```diff
-clicksCounter: ({sku}) => currentValueOf(sku),
+clicksCounter: ({sku}) => console.log(sku) || currentValueOf(sku),
```

</blockquote>

**Awesome!** Your GraphQL server now has a new feature, let’s use it!

### Query your new graph

Try to execute the previous query again in your GraphQL playground:

```graphql
# http://localhost:4000/playground
{
  product(sku: "WH09") {
    sku
    clicksCounter
  }
}
```

You must now have a real value returned!

```json
{
  "data": {
    "product": {
      "sku": "WH09",
      "clicksCounter": 0
    }
  }
}
```

> Let’s increment it by sending a Mutation to our server:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can even increment the counter by sending a Mutation to your server:
```

```graphql
# http://localhost:4000/playground
mutation {
  incrementProductCounter(sku: "WH09", incrementValue: 2) {
    success
  }
}
```

> If it was successful, the above query must now return `2` as the `clicksCounter`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If it was successful, the above query must now return `2` int the `clicksCounter` field.
```

mutiline :)

value.

### Asynchronous resolvers

In the previous example resolvers were synchronous, meaning that they returned a
value that was immediately available. Most of the time, your resolvers will
fetch data from a remote service and return them asynchronously using a
`Promise`.

> Returning `Promise` from resolvers is supported out of the box. We encourage you

Reviewer: I don't see the value of the `We encourage you to experiment with it.` sentence.

There's quite no use of experimenting with hand made Promise here. I'd be better to talk about experimenting with an API imo.
